

AI Approach to Determining the Optimal Materials for an EV Battery Based on Suitable Properties
Omar A. (student)1 *, Faisal Nawab (mentor)2
1. Leigh High School, 5210 Leigh Ave, San Jose, CA 95124, USA
* Corresponding author email: omar.ehab.us@gmail.com


Abstract
Electric vehicles are becoming increasingly widespread as they offer an environmentally sustainable solution to
limit reliance on gasoline-dependent vehicles. A significant issue limiting wide-spread EV use are the limitations
of current batteries. While battery technology has come a long way, many issues arise with EVs, such as higher costs,
 shorter range, reusability, and lifespan. Different materials have their strengths and weaknesses with regards to
 different metrics and no material has the best properties for each metric. This paper uses a ML model to predict
 battery performance based on material properties then concludes the necessary trade-offs between properties and
 how to find the best battery materials that balance between each.


The rise of EVs have given the world an alternative to gasoline-powered vehicles. However, while battery technology has
advanced drastically, it still currently prevents wider adoption of EVs over gasoline- powered cars due to EVs having
 less range, shorter lifespans, and higher costs. EV batteries contribute a lot to this with less energy density
 compared to gasoline, higher price, and degradation over time. In the field of chemistry, no single material has
 all the optimal properties, and EV battery chemistry is no different. Different materials provide varying levels of
  energy density, lifespan, and cost. For example, having higher voltage results in higher energy density, but at the
   same time accelerates degradation. This implies that the ideal battery with the best properties for all metrics is
   impossible and that trade-offs are necessary since the same property that has a favorable metric can be unfavorable
    for another.
Over the years, advancements in AI have greatly impacted the field of chemistry and material science. ML models are now
capable of analyzing enormous amounts of data both accurately and efficiently. This helps cut time and expenses that
would have impeded research efforts. These models can now be used to predict a material’s properties based on its design
and choice of materials. It is now used in applications such as battery research to find which battery materials form
the most optimal batteries without time-consuming and expensive trial and error methods. Now, AI is capable of helping
 researchers discover better materials that can produce more optimal batteries that can improve EVs. Batteries help in
  contributing to this by using materials that have higher energy densities, slower degradation, and lower costs.
Since materials compromise on their properties, researchers and manufacturers are forced to prioritize certain properties
 and metrics over others. The best materials for a battery vary depending on the application - some prioritize energy
 density, while others prioritize lifespan or cost. For EV applications, all of these metrics are important, but a
 manufacturer would still have to figure out which material can perform the best based on the requirements and
 priorities. AI models can predict these metrics by testing hundreds of thousands of possible material combinations and
 determine performance based on the battery’s properties. After determining the battery’s performance metrics, the model
  can apply it to EV applications to determine how the battery will contribute to the EV performance.
  This paper analyzes the details and nuances of how different materials’ properties improve in certain metrics while
  hurting others.
The paper will start by analyzing how battery metrics influence EV performance. The paper will then determine which
battery properties are the most important for each metric and how materials influence the overall properties.
 After that, ML models will be explained to demonstrate how they are used to determine the battery’s overall properties
  based on the materials chosen. Based on the data and inferences collected, the study will go over the nuances and
  conflicts between maximizing cost, energy density, and life expectancy for the battery.


